best practices: add index best practices (#21218)
pingcap/docs: best-practices/index-best-practices.md

---

> title: Index Best Practices

Author: ```suggestion
title: Best Practices for Managing Indexes and Identifying Unused Indexes 
```

> summary: This document summarizes best practices for managing indexes and identifying unused indexes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: Learn the best practices for managing indexes and identifying unused indexes in TiDB.
```

---

# Best Practices for Managing Indexes and Identifying Unused Indexes

Indexes are essential for optimizing database query performance, reducing the need to scan large amounts of data. However, as applications evolve, business logic changes, and data volume grows, indexing inefficiencies emerge, including the following:

- Unused indexes: these indexes are once relevant but are no longer selected by the query optimizer, consuming storage and adding unnecessary overhead to write operations.
- Inefficient indexes: some indexes are used by the optimizer but scan more data than expected, increasing disk I/O and slowing down query performance.

> If left unaddressed, these indexing issues can cause higher storage costs, degraded performance, and operational inefficiencies. In a distributed SQL database like TiDB, indexing inefficiencies have an even greater impact due to the scale of distributed queries and the complexity of multi-node coordination. That is why regular index audits are crucial for maintaining an optimized database. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If left unaddressed, these indexing issues can cause higher storage costs, degraded performance, and operational inefficiencies. In a distributed SQL database like TiDB, indexing inefficiencies have an even greater impact due to the scale of distributed queries and the complexity of multi-node coordination. That is why regular index audits are crucial for keeping your database optimized.
```

Proactively identifying and optimizing indexes helps:

- Reduce storage overhead: removing unused indexes frees up disk space and reduces long-term storage costs.
- Improve write performance: write-heavy workloads (such as `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE`) perform better when unnecessary index maintenance is eliminated.

> - Optimize query execution: efficient indexes reduce the number of rows scanned, improving query speed and response times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Optimize query execution: efficient indexes reduce the number of rows scanned, improving query speed and response time.
```

- Streamline database management: fewer and well-optimized indexes simplify backups, recovery, and schema changes.

> Because indexes evolve with changing business logic, regular index audits are a standard part of database maintenance. TiDB provides built-in observability tools to help you detect, evaluate, and optimize indexes without risk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because indexes evolve with changing business logic, regular index audits are a standard part of database maintenance. TiDB provides built-in observability tools to help you detect, evaluate, and optimize indexes safely and effectively.
```

> TiDB v8.0.0 introduces the [`TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`](/information-schema/information-schema-tidb-index-usage.md) table and the [`schema_unused_indexes`](/sys-schema/sys-schema-unused-indexes.md) table to help you track index usage patterns and make data-driven decisions. 
> 
> Because indexes evolve with changing business logic, regular index audits are a standard part of database maintenance. TiDB provides built-in observability tools to help you detect, evaluate, and optimize indexes without risk.

Author: ```suggestion
Because indexes evolve with changing business logic, regular index audits are a standard part of database maintenance. TiDB provides built-in observability tools to help you detect, evaluate, and optimize indexes without risk.

TiDB v8.0.0 introduces the [`INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`](/information-schema/information-schema-tidb-index-usage.md) table and the [`mysql.schema_unused_indexes`](/sys-schema/sys-schema-unused-indexes.md) table to help you track index usage patterns and make data-driven decisions. 
```

> This document describes the tools that you can use to detect and eliminate unused or inefficient indexes, thus improving TiDB's performance and stability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes the tools that you can use to detect and remove unused or inefficient indexes, thus improving TiDB's performance and stability.
```

## TiDB index optimization: a data-driven approach

Indexes are essential for query performance, but removing them without proper analysis can lead to unexpected regressions or even system instability. To ensure safe and effective index management, TiDB provides built-in observability tools that allow you to:

- Track index usage in real-time: identify how often an index is accessed and whether it contributes to performance improvements.
- Detect unused indexes: locate indexes that have not been used since the database is last restarted.
- Assess index efficiency: evaluate whether an index filters data effectively or causes excessive I/O overhead.
- Safely test index removal: temporarily make an index invisible before deleting it to ensure no queries depend on it.

TiDB simplifies index optimization by introducing the following powerful tools:

> - `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`: monitors index usage patterns and query frequency.
> - `schema_unused_indexes`: lists indexes that have not been used since the database is last restarted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `INFORMATION_SCHEMA`.`TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`: monitors index usage patterns and query frequency.
- `mysql`.`schema_unused_indexes`: lists indexes that have not been used since the database is last restarted.
```

| QUERY_TOTAL              | bigint(21)  | YES  |      | NULL    |       |
| KV_REQ_TOTAL             | bigint(21)  | YES  |      | NULL    |       |
| ROWS_ACCESS_TOTAL        | bigint(21)  | YES  |      | NULL    |       |
| PERCENTAGE_ACCESS_0      | bigint(21)  | YES  |      | NULL    |       |
| PERCENTAGE_ACCESS_0_1    | bigint(21)  | YES  |      | NULL    |       |
| PERCENTAGE_ACCESS_1_10   | bigint(21)  | YES  |      | NULL    |       |
| PERCENTAGE_ACCESS_10_20  | bigint(21)  | YES  |      | NULL    |       |
| PERCENTAGE_ACCESS_20_50  | bigint(21)  | YES  |      | NULL    |       |
| PERCENTAGE_ACCESS_50_100 | bigint(21)  | YES  |      | NULL    |       |
| PERCENTAGE_ACCESS_100    | bigint(21)  | YES  |      | NULL    |       |
| LAST_ACCESS_TIME         | datetime    | YES  |      | NULL    |       |
+--------------------------+-------------+------+------+---------+-------+
14 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

For the explanations of these columns, see [`TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`](/information-schema/information-schema-tidb-index-usage.md).

### Identify unused and inefficient indexes using `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`

> Identify unused and inefficient indexes using `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes how to identify unused and inefficient indexes using the `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` system table.
```

- Unused indexes:

    - If `QUERY_TOTAL = 0`, the index has not been used by any queries.
    - If `LAST_ACCESS_TIME` shows a long time ago, the index might no longer be relevant.

- Inefficient indexes:

    - Large values in `PERCENTAGE_ACCESS_100` suggest full index scans, which might indicate an inefficient index.
    - Compare `ROWS_ACCESS_TOTAL` and `QUERY_TOTAL` to determine whether the index scans too many rows relative to its usage.

> By leveraging `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`, you can gain detailed insights into index performance, making it easier to remove unnecessary indexes and optimize query execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using the `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` system table, you can gain detailed insights into index performance, making it easier to remove unnecessary indexes and optimize query execution.
```

### Considerations when using `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`

> Take the following into consideration when you use `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take the following into consideration when you use the `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` system table.
```

> ### Considerations when using `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`

Reviewer: With "#### Track historical data", this heading is not so appropriate to me.
```suggestion
### Use `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` effectively
```

#### Data updates are delayed

> To minimize performance impact, `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` does not update instantly. Index usage metrics might be delayed by up to 5 minutes. Take this delay into consideration when you analyze queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To minimize performance impact, `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` does not update instantly. Index usage metrics might be delayed by up to 5 minutes. Keep this latency in mind when you analyze queries.
```

#### Index usage data is not persisted

> `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` stores data in memory, meaning it does not persist across node restarts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` system table stores data in memory, meaning it does not persist across node restarts.
```

When a TiDB node restarts, all index usage statistics from that node are cleared.

#### Track historical data

You can periodically export index usage snapshots using the following SQL statement:

```sql
SELECT * FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIDB_INDEX_USAGE INTO OUTFILE '/backup/index_usage_snapshot.csv';
```

This enables historical tracking by comparing snapshots over time, helping you detect trends in index usage and make more informed pruning decisions.

## Consolidate index usage data across TiDB nodes using `CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`

Because TiDB is a distributed SQL database, query workloads are spread across multiple nodes. Each TiDB node tracks its own local index usage. For a global view of index performance, TiDB provides the [`CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`](/information-schema/information-schema-tidb-index-usage.md#cluster_tidb_index_usage) system table. This view consolidates index usage data from all TiDB nodes, ensuring that distributed query workloads are fully accounted for when optimizing indexing strategies.

> Unlike `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`, which provides insights at the node level, this cluster-wide view `CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` lets you:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`, which provides insights at the node level, this cluster-wide view `CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` lets you do the following:
```

> - Detect inconsistencies in index usage. For example, an index might be frequently used on some nodes but unused on others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Detect inconsistencies in index usage. For example, an index might be frequently used on some nodes while remaining unused on others.
```

```

This helps determine whether an index is truly unused across all nodes or only for specific instances, allowing you to make informed decisions on index removal.

### Key differences between `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` and `CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`

The following tables show the key differences between `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` and `CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`.

| Feature          | `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`                                   | `CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`                              |
| ---------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |
| Scope            | Tracks index usage within a single database.         | Aggregates index usage across the entire TiDB cluster   |
| Index tracking   | Data is local to each database.                      | Provides a centralized cluster-wide view                |
| Primary use case | Debugs index usage at the database instance level    | Analyzes global index patterns and multi-node behavior  |

### Considerations when using `CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE`

Because this system table consolidates data from multiple nodes, consider the following:

- Delayed data updates

>     The data is refreshed periodically to minimize performance impact. If index usage is analyzed immediately after a query execution, allow some time for the metrics to update.

Author: ```suggestion
    To minimize performance impact, `CLUSTER_TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` does not update instantly. Index usage metrics might be delayed by up to 5 minutes. Take this delay into consideration when you analyze queries.
```

| bookshop        | users         | nickname           |
| bookshop        | ratings       | uniq_book_user_idx |
+---------------- + ------------- + -------------------+
```

### Considerations when using `schema_unused_indexes`

#### Indexes are considered unused only since the last restart

- If a TiDB node restarts, the usage tracking data is reset.
- Ensure the system has been running long enough to capture a representative workload before relying on this data.

#### Not all unused indexes can be dropped immediately

Some indexes might be rarely used but still essential for specific queries, batch jobs, or reporting tasks. Before dropping an index, consider whether it supports the following:

- Rare but essential queries, for example, monthly reports, analytics
- Batch processing jobs that do not run daily
- Ad-hoc troubleshooting queries

If the index appears in important but infrequent queries, it is recommended to keep it or make it invisible first.

You can use [invisible indexes](#safely-test-index-removal-with-invisible-indexes) to safely test whether an index can be removed without impacting performance.

### Manually create the `schema_unused_indexes` view

> Because `TIDB_INDEX_USAGE` is cleared after a TiDB node restarts, ensure that the node has been running for a sufficient amount of time before making decisions. For clusters upgraded from an earlier version to TiDB v8.0.0 or later, you must manually create the system schema and the included views. 

Author: ```suggestion
For clusters upgraded from an earlier version to TiDB v8.0.0 or later, you must manually create the system schema and the included views. 
```
